okay we're gonna work through
differentiation from first principles
I'm gonna look at the theory and then
we're gonna try an example as well I'm
gonna start off with my set of axes here
and draw a really general curve this
curve could be anything at all you're
familiar with y equals x squared y
equals x cubed y equals 3x to the power
of 5 plus 4 X to the power of 4 plus 3x
to the pastorate you get the picture it
could be anything so there's my x and y
axes and there's my really general curve
it's y equals FX it's some function of X
that's a point P on the curve and
there's a tangent through P on the curve
this is going to become important later
there's another point Q on the curve now
if I draw a line through P and through Q
I don't have a tangent but I've got a
secant we could calculate the gradient
of that secant and that's what we'll do
one of the purposes of differentiation
from first principles is to look at the
gradient of the tangent through P now so
that this process can work properly what
I want is to make sure that the interval
between P and Q is as small as possible
and the reason for that is that the
closer that Q gets to P then the more
the secant through P and Q looks like
the tangent just through P now my Q's
moved towards P there slight problem
though with my animation here the secant
the red secant there probably should
have moved as well okay that needed to
move so that it would look more like the
gradient look like it had the gradient
of the orange line which is the tangent
so my Q has approached P the gradient of
my secant in other words which is there
gets closer and closer to the gradient
of the orange line which is my tangent
and it mathematically is the error
two main approaches mpq means the
gradient of PQ approaches the gradient
at the point p on the curve y equals FX
now those two things are true that
statement is true that the gradient of
PQ approaches the gradient at t as long
as the distance between P and Q gets
increasingly smaller we're going to
actually give our points coordinates now
they're going to be very general P is
the point now with the x coordinate X
and the y coordinate f of X and Q is the
point X plus h f of X plus h now where
did that come from well all that saying
is that the distance along the x axis
between P and Q is a distance of H units
in other words if P is at the point X
then Q is at the point X plus h now
similarly if P is the point along the y
axis of f of X then the distance
vertically up to Q is f of X plus h now
this is generally the way that the
coordinates are written when one's
trying to differentiate by first
principles very similar to the way in
which textbook exercises to it there are
other methods but this is the method
we'll stick with
today using that letter H to represent
the distance between P and Q on the x
axis see here with my cursor I'm
pointing to the x axis so here is
approximately where on the x axis P is
and if we go a little bit further along
then you find Q and the distance between
P and Q on that x axis is H units H
approaches zero means the distance
between P and Q along the x axis
approaches zero so from here
to hear that approaches zero the closer
and closer P and Q get together all
right so let's put all of that notation
into some sort of formula we already
know that the gradient equals the rise
over the run and that's the difference
between the Y values divided by the
difference between the X values
y2 minus y1 over x2 minus x1 and this is
the reason why it's difficult without
calculus impossible without calculus to
talk about the gradient at a point and
that's what we're interested in doing
with calculus with respect to curves we
want to find what is the gradient at a
point on a curve the reason why we've
got straight lines here is because we
can use the gradient formula to define
what the gradient is for a straight line
the only way it's going to make sense
for a single point on a curve is when
the two points that we're interested in
are extremely close together as close as
you like infinitesimally close together
I'm going to define something therefore
called the gradient function so it's not
the gradient as a single value now but
the gradient will have a different value
at different points along the curve we
can see on my blue curve here at the
point P the gradient looks relatively
steep but up here near Q the gradient
seems fairly flat in other words
steepness of the curve isn't very great
as we move away from Q and we head back
down the other side of the curve the
blue curve what we find as the gradient
turns negative in other words the
gradients changing at each point along
the curve so rather than it being a
single number the gradient is going to
be some function of X as you move along
the x axis the gradient will be changing
we've had the gradients a function of X
and that's why we're using this new
notation this mutation is due to
Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz
and live let's use the letter D because
D stands for difference the difference
in the y-values divided by the
difference in the x-values and as I've
said it's simply new notation okay so
regarded as as being analogous to the
letter M when we're talking about
straight lines it's the change in Y with
respect to X or simply the gradient
function okay this is it this is a
formula that I was somewhat reluctant to
put in but I thought it'll make things a
little bit clearer you don't see this
generally in textbooks but our little
emphasize what's to come and the
gradient function is equal to the limit
as H approaches 0 in other words as that
distance along the x axis between P and
Q gets ever smaller has it approaches
zero then we're interested in finding
out what the gradient of that straight
line from T to Q is because that will
approximately be the same as the
gradient exactly at P indeed as H
approaches zero effectively equals zero
because it's so infinitesimally small
the gradient of the straight line P Q
will be the gradient at P and if we want
to calculate the gradient from P to Q
then we can use this gradient formula y2
minus y1 over x2 minus x1 but the
coordinates of y2 y1 x2 an x1 which we
defined on the previous slide are
slightly different to what we used to
the X FX there the X plus h f of X plus
h so I just wanted to emphasize there
that the the gradient function comes
from a limit formula it's a limit the
gradient function and as I say here we
want a formula for the gradient of the
tangent to the curve at the point P and
this is the gradient of the secant
between P XFX and that's that they're
the coordinates of P X f of X and Q
X plus h f of X plus h and when the
difference between them along the x-axis
is infinitesimal then this formula will
work so now I'm gonna sub in those
coordinates here into this formula so
this is this formula here that's
appeared now is one step prior to the
formula you'll get for differentiation
by first principles in the textbook and
the way that you get this formula is
simply to take this formula here and to
sub in the coordinates for P and the
coordinates for Q if you let y2 and x2
be the coordinates of Q and x1 and y1 be
the coordinates of P okay so what is y2
or Y twos f of X plus h and what's y1
that's f of X and similarly on the
denominator here you can see X 2 is X
plus h and X 1 is just X we can simplify
the denominator remove the brackets the
X's cancel to leave you with nothing but
H down the bottom there now
for those of you who are a step ahead
you might realize that well you can't
simply substitute H is equal to 0 into
this formula because you're not allowed
to divide by 0
it's against the law yeah well it's
against the law of maths you can't
divide by 0 and so what that means is
that when we do the algebra for a
specific curve and differentiate by
first principles you'll find that it
will always be the case that the H on
the bottom will cancel with a factor on
the numerator and we'll see that an
example that we do shortly but before
that we might just recap using the
derivation for that formula we've just
found without the graph so once more
remember our X 1 value is simply X 1 X 2
value is
a little bit bigger than this namely X
plus h what takes real haters a number
as close as you like to zero this means
that the two Y values will be f of X and
f of X plus h our gradient formula y2
minus y1 over x2 minus x1 it takes on a
slightly different form when instead of
talking about the gradient we talk about
the gradient function to Y DX so instead
of the letter M we're now going to use
2y DX and once more the reason for that
is because M when we're talking about
straight lines equals a single number M
is equal to 2 or minus 4 it's equal to a
constant number but with curves it won't
be there'll be an x involved so I might
be 2x or 3x or 4x squared it'll be a
function of X so that gradient function
is going to be defined as a limit as H
approaches 0 of the gradient function of
the gradient formula there I've
substituted in x1 and y1 and x2 and y2
they're the coordinates of P and Q a
little bit of simplification on the
denominator leads to the formula that
you really need to commit to memory this
is the formula for differentiation by
first principles and what you can notice
is the formula still looks like a rise
over a run the top of that formula is
still the difference between the Y
coordinates like warden it's rather and
the bottom is still the difference
between the x coordinates
okay time for an example we're gonna
start with the parabola that's the place
that I think most teachers start just
looking at the most simple case of the
curve y equals x squared and I want to
find the gradient of a tangent any point
on the parabola there's my parabola and
I want to know what is the gradient of a
tangent there or really perhaps I want
to know what the gradient of a tangent
say there is or maybe even the gradient
of a tangent there looks like that green
tangent probably has a creating of 0 but
look at things yeah we need to know is
there a single formula for this
particular curve y equals x square that
will be able to tell us what the
gradient is at any point on that
parabola and that's our purpose what is
the gradient of a tangent drawn at any
point on that parabola going to be is
there a relationship between the
gradient of the tangent drawn and the x
value where the tangent intersects the
curve
I word that you're going to become
increasingly familiar with is this idea
of differentiation to differentiate a
curve means to find the gradient
function given that curve so
differentiation will give us a formula
for this parabola that we'll be able to
generate the value of the gradient for
the tangent to any curve so we're not
just going to stick with life is x
squared we're eventually going to look
at more general cases okay
so we've already generated a formula to
enable us to differentiate by first
principles and now we're going to try a
specific example and calculate the
gradient function which we're going to
call 2y DX or dy by DX for a particular
function and we're going to use y equals
x squared and the process we're going
through often referred to as
differentiation or word you're going to
become familiar with increasingly over
time now for the case of y equals x
squared the parabola we're going to not
use Y anymore we're going to use f of X
instead and our f of X is going to
represent x squared so in the gradient
function formula over here
wherever I see an f of X I'm gonna sub
in x squared and well our function
notation shows us that if the function
of X is x squared then the function of X
plus h must be X plus h all squared okay
so I'm gonna be able to sub in two
things on the numerator team in order to
eventually derive what my gradient
function will be so let's see our first
step here my f of X is x squared and my
f of X plus h is X plus h all squared
okay if f of X is x squared and I want
to know what f of X plus h is then what
I need to do
is to find wherever there's an X it's a
substitute at X plus h now I'm going to
expand this bracket here and so I've
expanded X plus h all squared to become
x squared plus 2xh plus h squared I've
still got my x squared left at the end
there and so in the next line that'll
become important where the x squared
here as a result of my expansion of X
plus h all squared and my x minus x
squared here effectively canceled each
other out and I'm left with 2x h plus h
squared and that's all divided by H and
my next line is where I've taken out a
common factor I really should have
included an extra line there but for
those of you who are able to follow me
you'll see that well H appears in - XH +
H appears in H squared and so my H on
the bottom can divide through the
numerator leaving me with nothing but 2
X + H on the top there and H on the
bottom has cancelled with that H and
it's countered with one of these hechas
because H approaches zero I'm left with
nothing else but 2 X ok
we're gonna try another example here
it'll be text up on your screen at the
moment which basically explains what
we're about to do which is differentiate
y equals 4x cubed minus 3x from first
principles we've already differentiated
y equals x squared and we just want to
recall that to differentiate is to find
the function which when we substitute
the x value into it it will give us the
value of the gradient of a tangent at
that point on the curve if I was to use
the letter M then M equals 2 X is a
formula for the gradient of a tangent to
y equals x squared at the point X I
don't normally use the letter M though
when we're talking about the gradient of
curve
okay because em normally stands for a
constant and so for that reason we don't
use em instead we use new notation which
is divided by DX or dy DX okay there's
my formula once more it needs to be
committed to memory so that we can begin
doing this question okay so I probably
should have written up there what one
we're doing but we can tell from here
that what I'm trying to do is to
differentiate y equals 4x cubed minus 3x
okay so that's my purpose here the
reason having like the written up there
though is because it simply won't fit in
at the slide you'll notice that a few of
these questions that you do require a
lot of space you know you're gonna be
looking a half a page to a page of
working sometimes depending upon how
many lines of algebra you can do in your
head okay so let's begin this one we're
subbing in for f of X this here we also
need to put in f of X plus h so f of X
plus h is the formula that you get when
you put X plus h into the spots in f of
X wherever you see an X I here I see an
X and here I see an X so I'm going to
put X plus h next to the 4 and cube it
all and I'm gonna put an X plus h next
to the 3 and so I've got a 4 X plus h or
cubed minus 3 of X plus and that's my
function of X plus h from that I'm going
to subtract my function of X and that's
how I get my numerator it's all divided
by H let's expand the brackets okay so
here we've used the fact that the
function f of X is equal to 4x cubed
minus 3x and so f of X plus h equals 4x
plus h cubed minus 3x plus h
okay so what's happened here - be
careful I've noticed that students seem
to think sometimes that although we know
how to expand something like X plus h or
squared to get x squared plus 2xh plus h
squared but when it comes to cubing X
plus h they'll immediately just put a 3
above the X and a 3 above the H to get X
cubed plus h cubed and think they're
done or that there's some formula indeed
for expanding X plus h or cubed there is
but we're not we we don't need to use it
we'll instead what we do is we just
split the X plus h or cubed into X plus
h times X plus h or squared okay so that
times that gives me that that just helps
us do the working that's the only thing
that I've done to get to that next line
and to get to this line well we know how
to expand X plus h or squared and that
becomes this I've expanded this bracket
here to get 3 X minus 3 hunch and we can
further expand the brackets and we end
up with something that looks rather ugly
this times x squared gives me x cubed x
times 2x H gives me 2x squared H X times
H squared gives me x hypeee squared h
times x squared use x squared H h times
2x HS 2x hey square and finally h times
height squared is H cubed check to see
you can get to that line from this one
finally the 4 has multiplied through
every single term there i've also
removes the last bracket here just be
aware of that minus times a minus gives
me a plus here collect like terms it's
an easy step but you need to be careful
to ensure that you do pick up all the
like terms you might want to think
rather than watching this straight
through I hope you're pausing it
particular points now might be a good
time to pause can you simplify from here
on from this point onwards what do you
do
factorized taking out a common factor of
H you should always be able to do that
many of these differentiation by first
principles problems there should be a
common factor of H that comes out and
the reason for that is that we need the
H on the top here to cancel with the H
on the bottom if it doesn't and then we
can't evaluate our limit
not in any trivial way anyway if our
limit approaches zero then if this
haitch is still there we're dividing by
zero
once again you're not allowed to against
the law it's just not logically possible
actually I've canceled my height on the
denominator there
and because it's a limit now I'm going
to regard as being zero any turn left
that contains a H okay so 12x times H
which is 0 is 0 and 4 times 0 is also 0
so my 12 XH that's going to vanish and
my 4-h that's going to vanish leaving me
with or what 12 x squared minus 3 and so
that's my answer I can just write I can
remove the limit notation now there's no
reason for me to continue saying it's
the limit as H approaches 0 there is no
longer any H there the H is dropped out
so my final answer is generally written
as 2 y DX equals 12x squared minus 3 and
so we're done